# artisanal-and-small-mining-detection
Project to detect artisanal and small scale mining with open access satellite imageray.

## Abstract

A large portion of the rare-earth metals mined [source necessary] originates from artisanal and small scale mining sources.  Artisanal and small scale mining pose a multitude of challenges to the supply chain management, the government of the mining and land rights, compliance of worker rights and much more. This abstract motivates the use of a cloud based satellite imagery detection of artisanal and small scale mining pits. The main goal of this tool is to support human rights for miners. ATTENTION: **This paper currently is a  perspective  of  machine  learning  engineers  for  a  technical  feasibility  study.  The  motivation reeks of unthinking global north builds and global south adopts scheme!** Three factors encourage the project to be worked on right now, ad herent to all is the timing. The first two factors describe the value opportunities generated by the use of the tool(s).  The last factor acts as an adaption catalyst.

1. The  **N**ational  **A**ction  **P**lans  on  Business  and  Human  Rights  (NAPs) [link](https://globalnaps.org)  are  policies  created  to  prevent  human  rights abuses  linked  to  business  activity.   These  policies  are  adopted  by  governments  around  the  world.  The  results  are laws  which  enforce  manufacturer  and  vender  to  comply  for  human  rights  along  the  supply  chain. The  laws  enable us to express a monetary value for previously unaccounted risk of human rights violations.  Which itself drives new business opportunities in the countries with strong NAP laws. However tools on a global scale are unavailable and new investments have to be made to measure the risk of human rights violation along the supply chain.
2.  **Satellite imagery** is available on a global scale. Specifically the ESA Copernicus project is three years old and provide enough  data  to  measure  artisanal  and  small  scale  mining. (The  Landsat  data  also  provides  valuable  data.) In  the past  years  new  easy-to-use  tools  were  placed  on  the  market.  The  user  base  which  utilises  satellite  imagery  grows. The support from the growing user base and the available tools lower the threshold to create value from satellite imagery.  The availability of data is accompanied by accessible computation infrastructure. Machine learning tools to build detection methods matured. The access threshold to build end-to-enduser-friendly  tools  is  much  lower  than  five, or even three  years  ago.  The  investment  to  build  an artisanal  and  small  scale  mining detection system on a global scale has decreased dramatically in the past years.
3. **More research needed on this section.** Geo-information cloud tools become more popular (?). Which result in better utilization of globally available open access data (open street maps, satellite imagery etc.? )?  Internet access to every inch of the globe is about to drop to 70 dollar a month (e.g.  starlink).  No upfront investment in this new cloud based tooling is needed.  Governmental agencies previously challenged by costs of new systems can embrace the tooling more easily.

## Project outline
The project is ongoing, open source (exact licence to be determined) and encourages everyone to participate. This is a very early stage of the project.  Because of the interest of the ”founder” a technical feasibility study is of interest right now.  The feasibility study validates whether artisanal and small scale mining can be detect with satellite imagery.
#### Draft of the project phases
1. Create a curated dataset. [currently]
2. Create a detection model.
3. Figuring out how people, institutions, government branches, NGOs can create value with the detection model.

## Participation opportunities
There  are  a  lot  of  unanswered  questions.  Feel  free  to  post  any  notes  and  questions  under issues. Do You now how cloud-based GIS systems are used? Are You a member of a local monitoring authority? Do You curate data sets?
